..
        SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0 or-later
        SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2024 grommunio GmbH

############
Introduction
############

The grommunio user documentation helps users to configure grommunio accounts
and work with grommunio on a daily basis. With the information in this
document, users will be able to work with grommunio without administrator
interaction. Since grommunio is easy to work with due to its basis on standards
well known in the workplace, grommunio does not require special training, if
the users already have a basic understanding of the clients used.

This documentation does not replace any sane client training for end users and
does not replace documentation of the client uses, such as Microsoft Outlook or
Mozilla Thunderbird. For clients which are non-exclusive to grommunio,
refer to the documentation provided by the client software as provided by the
vendor.

The goal of this document is to simplify the configuration effort for users and
administrators as well as shine a light on the differences in configuration and
handling compared to other solutions.

Since grommunio is a comprehensive communication and collaboration solution
that includes e-mail, calendaring, contacts, tasks, notes, video meetings, chat
and file management, not all clients are able to deliver the entire feature set
provided by grommunio. Instead, some features are only available in some
clients, while grommunio web provides a web-based possibility to have the
features closer to each other.

grommunio features some cutting-edge collaboration features, only available in
certain areas of the solution due to the platform limitations of some
environments (such as desktop).

With its integration features, grommunio is anxious to deliver a most
integrated solution to todays needs: Simplicity, Performance, Stability,
Productivity.

The following chapters will show how to configure and setup grommunio accounts
with the preferred client of choice (Microsoft Outlook, Android, Apple Mail
(iOS), Apple Mail (macOS), Microsoft Mail, Mozilla Thunderbird).
Since grommunio is focused on delivering
its products according to well-established computer standards, the list of
clients covered in this manual is not exhaustive. The chance, the client of
choice not covered in this manual operating well with grommunio are very high,
as long as the client respects established computer standards (RFCs) and/or
documented protocol specifications.

For illustration purposes, grommunio provides step-by-step instructions on how
to configure accounts, however, the illustrations shown might differ slightly
from your environment. This documentation has been written with the sole
intention of delivering the necessary steps to setup grommunio, with the
intention of documenting the relevant portions which are in the very most cases
version independent from a content perspective.

.. note::
   While grommunio is determined to keep the documentation regularly
   up-to-date, computer standards regularly receive updates. While
   illustrations might differ slightly from the setup used, the content should
   allow a seamless configuration and setup.

.. important::
   Should you encounter any differences in your environment or specifically be
   unable to setup your account, we welcome any requests, additions or
   corrections at our community at `https://community.grommunio.com
   <https://community.grommunio.com>`_ or with a valid subscription at
   `office@grommunio.com <office@grommunio.com>`_.
